Update state manager documentation (#707)
Consensys/doc.linea: docs/architecture/stack/evm-state-manager/index.mdx

---
title: EVM state manager
description: How state management works on Linea
sidebar_position: 4
image: /img/socialCards/evm-state-manager.jpg
---

The state manager is the part of the execution client responsible for updating the state of the 
network globally, and the state of every account individually. The state manager also audits the
"read" access made in the EVM, meaning it monitors, verifies, and logs all operations where the
EVM needs to read data from the blockchain state.

:::info

"State" refers to the data stored on the blockchain at any given point in time. To

> update state is to update the record of the contents of every account — if the contents have 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
update state is to update the record of the contents of every account whose contents have 
```

changed. 

:::

> The main task of the state manager is to receive blocks that have been executed by the [sequencer](../sequencer/index.mdx) 

Author: Added some detail below to clarify this point!

data about the state of every account on the blockchain. 

A Merkle tree is comprised of 'nodes' that branch off from each other. At the base is the 'root', 
or state root, from which branches stem, and leaves stem from the branches. 

<div class="img-large">
  <div class="mermaid-medium">
    ```mermaid
        flowchart TD
            A[root] --> B[node] & C[node]
            B --> D[node] & E[node]
            C --> F[node] & G[node]
    ```
  </div>
</div>

Each node, regardless of type, is represented by a cryptographic hash which encodes data about its 
properties — for example, the contents of your account. Each hash encodes the hashes of its child 
nodes. Taken to its full extent, this cascading system means the root encodes data of the state of 
every single account on the blockchain. 

Cryptographic hashes are deterministic, which means you can reverse the hash function to get the 
data which it encoded. If you have the hash of the root—the only node without a parent—you can 
theoretically derive from it the data of any node in the entire tree. 

As a layer 2 (L2) network, Linea is in the business of making transacting faster and more efficient.

> Linea implements a sparse Merkle tree due to the inefficiencies of standard Merkle tree

Reviewer: My takeaway from A's docs is that Linea uses SMT just for the proof gen/storage and that the standard PMT is actually used to maintain (Linea) world state as its more efficient for that purpose? I may have totally misinterpreted this??

Author: Yeah, this is not crystal clear to me either. I think we have it correct already though in that the SMT is a more efficient method for account storage because it means you can assume the contents of a node and its children without having to actually access their contents. I think it may confuse if we also state it is inefficient? Maybe it's something to do with Linea's fast block time, far faster than L1, that means the SMT can't be used for world state as well.

implementations. Standard Merkle trees require recomputation for every block, leading to excessive 
computational demands.

### Sparse Merkle trees

> Linea's state management uses sparse Merkle trees to minimize computation and contribute to the 

Reviewer: Suggest making clear that the SMT is used to compute and store the proof, it is the L2 state update+proof that minimizes computation on the L1 (you likely have somewhere in these docs to link off to re the efficiency gains?). Actually, generating the proofs is computationally intensive, but verifying them is computationally trivial -- this is the efficiency the L2 offers the L1.

        null] & E["`**node D:**`"
        null]
        C --> F["`**node E**`":
        data] & G["`**node F**`":
        data]
    ```
  </div>
</div>

In the example above, the children of node A (leaves) contain null values, which means node A does 
too. Node B, meanwhile, reflects that its children also contain values.

With this construction, we do not need to keep track of every individual node's hash. Instead, we 
can assume hashes that reflect the default value are empty, and the subtree or node that lies 
further down the chain of nodes can be disregarded; we only need to pay attention to the ones that 
correspond to _non-empty_ subtrees.

## Cryptographic accumulator

In this context, we can consider Linea's sparse Merkle tree as a type of "cryptographic 
accumulator". A cryptographic accumulator is a type of cryptographic primitive encoding a collection 
of items into very short strings and allowing read/write operations to be proven. Merkle trees and 
sparse Merkle trees are elementary examples of accumulators but there are others with more powerful 
capabilities.

To fit the EVM requirements, Linea's state manager uses an extended version of a sparse Merkle tree 

> that enables it to prove all CRUD (create, read, update, delete) operations for a key-addressed 

Author: Removed the "to meet EVM requirements" to prevent confusion!

### Tracking empty leaves

All leaves in the tree are populated with default/zero values at initialization. Since a 
deterministic hashing function will ensure that these leaves are always represented by the same 
hash, empty leaves can be easily recognized by the accumulator. 

However, in order for the state manager to update a storage slot with data about a Linea account's 
contents, it must know which empty leaf to overwrite, and exactly where these empty leaves are. A 
further consideration is that we require the index of any 'new' leaf—an empty leaf being updated 
so that it stores data—to be overwritten in a deterministic way. This requirement means that anyone 
can theoretically reconstruct the tree simply by looking at transaction history. 

To ensure consistency in the leaves' position, the state manager only ever inserts 'new' leaves to
the left of the previous leaf in the tree. If this wasn't the case, and the state manager was able
to insert any node in any position, it would be impossible to reconstitute the tree in the exact 
same configuration, severely impacting the ability of L1 to verify the Merkle proof provided.

## Applying the accumulator

> The Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) uses a variant of a Merkle tree known as a [Merkle-Patricia Trie](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/data-structures-and-encoding/patricia-merkle-trie/) to track:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) uses the standard form of the Merkle tree known as a [Merkle-Patricia Trie](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/data-structures-and-encoding/patricia-merkle-trie/) to track:
```

- World state, which keeps track of accounts, and;
- Account storage state (or simply 'storage'), which keeps track of the contents of each account. 

On Linea, we adapt this structure, incorporating the custom cryptographic accumulator described 
above.

The accumulator can perform the following operations:
- **Insertion**: adding a new storage slot to the tree, triggered by storing a non-zero value in a 
previously zero-valued slot.
- **Update**: changing the value of an existing storage slot in the tree, triggered by storing a new 
non-zero value in a previously non-zero slot.
- **Deletion**: removing a storage slot from the tree, triggered by storing the zero value in a 
previously non-zero slot.
- **Read zero**: proving non-membership, triggered when a storage slot has been accessed, but not 
updated, and its value is zero.
- **Read non-zero**: proving membership, triggered when a storage slot has been accessed, but not 
updated and its value is non-zero.

> These operations are applied to two trees; [world state](#world-state) and [account storage state](#account-storage-state).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Linea maintains two Merkle-Patricia Trietrees; one to maintain [world state](#world-state) and the other for [account storage state](#account-storage-state).
```

---
title: EVM state manager
description: How state management works on Linea
sidebar_position: 4
image: /img/socialCards/evm-state-manager.jpg
---

The state manager is the part of the execution client responsible for updating the state of the 
network globally, and the state of every account individually. The state manager also audits the 

> "read" access made in the EVM.

Author: looks good. that sentence required elaboration

:::info

"State", in this context, refers to the data stored on the blockchain at any given point in time. To
update state is to update the record of the contents of every account — if the contents have 
changed. 

:::

Its main task is to receive blocks that have been executed by the sequencer and use the trace data 
from their execution to update the state of the network. The state manager uses a variation of the 
Merkle tree called a sparse Merkle tree (SMT) to track, manage, and update storage slots representing 
accounts more efficiently. 

It then passes this updated network state information to the [prover](/architecture/stack/trace-expansion-proving/proving) 
in the form of Merkle proofs for submission to Ethereum Mainnet (L1). 

Below, we'll explain the element of Linea's state management in greater detail.

## Merkle trees

> ### Overview: how Merkle trees work

Reviewer 2: This level 3 heading is probably not required? Content can live under the "Merkle trees" topic.

specific value, such as zero. Because all leaf nodes have the same hash value, the parent nodes and 
higher-level nodes also have the same hash value. A node whose hash is the default value for its 
level is therefore considered to represent an _empty_ subtree. 

<div class="center-container">
  <div class="mermaid-medium">
    ```mermaid
    flowchart TD
        A[root] --> B["`**node A**`"
        null] & C["`**node B**`"
        contains data]
        B --> D["`**node C**`":
        null] & E["`**node D:**`"
        null]
        C --> F["`**node E**`":
        data] & G["`**node F**`":
        data]
    ```
  </div>
</div>

In the example above, the children of node A (leaves) contain null values, which means node A does 
too. Node B, meanwhile, reflects that its children also contain values.

With this construction, we do not need to keep track of every individual node's hash. Instead, we 
can assume hashes that reflect the default value are empty, and the subtree or node that lies 
further down the chain of nodes can be disregarded; we only need to pay attention to the ones that 
correspond to _non-empty_ subtrees.

> ## Cryptographic accumulator

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused about the relationship between the Cryptographic accumulator and SMT.
Is the SMT being discussed within the context of the Cryptographic accumulator topic?

Not sure the topic structure helps showing the relationship.

Author: Rearranged the paragraphs and added a sentence or two to make the flow into this section a bit better

The Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) uses a variant of a Merkle tree known as a [Merkle-Patricia Trie](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/data-structures-and-encoding/patricia-merkle-trie/) to track:
- World state, which keeps track of accounts, and;
- Account storage state (or simply 'storage'), which keeps track of the contents of each account. 

On Linea, we adapt this structure, incorporating the custom cryptographic accumulator described 
above.

The accumulator can perform the following operations:
- **Insertion**: adding a new storage slot to the tree, triggered by storing a non-zero value in a 
previously zero-valued slot.
- **Update**: changing the value of an existing storage slot in the tree, triggered by storing a new 
non-zero value in a previously non-zero slot.
- **Deletion**: removing a storage slot from the tree, triggered by storing the zero value in a 
previously non-zero slot.
- **Read zero**: proving non-membership, triggered when a storage slot has been accessed, but not 
updated, and its value is zero.
- **Read non-zero**: proving membership, triggered when a storage slot has been accessed, but not 
updated and its value is non-zero.

> These operations are applied to two trees:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These operations are applied to two trees; [world state](#world-state) and [account storage state](#account-storage-state).
```

        null] & E["`**node D:**`"
        null]
        C --> F["`**node E**`":
        data] & G["`**node F**`":
        data]
    ```
  </div>
</div>

In the example above, the children of node A (leaves) contain null values, which means node A does 
too. Node B, meanwhile, reflects that its children also contain values.

With this construction, we do not need to keep track of every individual node's hash. Instead, we 
can assume hashes that reflect the default value are empty, and the subtree or node that lies 
further down the chain of nodes can be disregarded; we only need to pay attention to the ones that 
correspond to _non-empty_ subtrees.

## Cryptographic accumulator

In this context, we can consider Linea's sparse Merkle tree as a type of "cryptographic 
accumulator". A cryptographic accumulator is a type of cryptographic primitive encoding a collection 
of items into very short strings and allowing read/write operations to be proven. Merkle trees and 
sparse Merkle trees are elementary examples of accumulators but there are others with more powerful 
capabilities.

Linea's state manager uses an extended version of a sparse Merkle tree that enables it to prove all 

> CRUD (create, read, update, delete) operations for a key-addressed database. As an outline, the 

Reviewer: Did this go through SME review? I am still confused by the CRUD statement here. Thought I added comment on this before.
My (probably naive) takeaway from A's doc is that the ability to overwrite the 0 is a feature required by the proof generator --> I don't think this update extends to storing state. I would recommend having SME review this as any mention of UD (especially the delete) must be made clear --> the immutable nature of blockchain (as in the typical use of PMT) allows for old data to be ignored thanks to availability of more recent data/updated state, this is NOT the same as a typical database's CRUD behaviour. FAO @jlwllmr

Author: @m4sterbunny thank you — as discussed, following up with SME on this issue 🫡
